---
title: "Learning the basics of kernel linux development"
date: 2024-04-23
---

This is a blog post about my experience learning the kernel development process. It was my first experience working directly with the linux kernel, and it was very interesting to learn its contribution workflow, despite being one of the pioneers forms of colaborative software development, it has some peculiarities compared to modern open software, such as patch sharing using email lists.

## Understanding the overall kernel structure

The linux kernel can be very intimidating for a beginner like me, so to have a better understanding of the overall organization I followed the tutorials created by Marcelo Schmitt on FLUSP website, that were tailored to aid newcomers to develop for the Linux kernel Industrial I/O subsystem, explaining how to setup a VM for devolment, create and modifying modules and build and deploy a new image.

### Tutorials:

- https://flusp.ime.usp.br/kernel/qemu-libvirt-setup/
- https://flusp.ime.usp.br/kernel/build-linux-for-arm/
- https://flusp.ime.usp.br/kernel/modules-intro/

While following those tutorials I ran into some issues. First, setting up libvert gave me a lot of problems, due to my laptop not being fully compatible with it, this made me give up on using libvert which didn't affect me that much.

Another issue I had was using the provided commands to ssh and scp, that were not working for some reason. But it was easily fixed by using the `ssh -p 2222` and `scp -P 2222` options to connect with the VM.

At the end of the process I felt like I had a better understanding of the kernel structure and I was feeling more confortable compiling and deploying images, which would be useful in the future.

## Creating and sending a patch

After getting a better idea of the kernel, it was time to create a patch. At first we tried to do some simple codestyle fixes, which gave us the opprtunity to learn the process of creating a patch from a git commit.

Since changing code styles seemed too straightforward, we shifted our proposal and moved on to another change proposal which involved replacing a specific function call with another one that enables error handling and improves readability in sections where this function is invoked. In this case, we replaced the method `iio_device_claim_direct_mode` with the method `iio_device_claim_direct_scoped`, in the file `iio/adc/ti-adc161s626.c` from the IIO subsystem, making the necessary adjustments. For the patch message we tried to follow the pattern of existing commits, starting the title with `iio: adc: ti-adc161s626:`. To create a patch from the commit we used `git format-patch`, and to send the email we used `git send-mail` command.

## Final thoughts

In my opinion this was a really valuable experience, learning more about the kernel development and the community gave me a better insight of how open source projects started.